.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2002 Detlev Zundel (dzu@denx.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.TH WDT_MPC5XXX "Denx specific extensions"
.SH NAME
wdt_mpc5xxx \- Watchdog driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/asm/wdt_mpc5xxx.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B wdt_mpc5xxx
driver implements a character device with major number 10 and minor
number 130.  It is a software abstraction of the hardware watchdog
with two different APIs.  While the driver periodically triggers the
hardware watchdog, the software can setup independent timeout periods.

.SH "REGULAR API"
The regular API provides a facility to setup a watchdog behaviour
.I shared
by all processes using the driver.  This interface uses read(2),
write(2) and the first two ioctl(2) calls listed below.  The
parameterless ioctl(2) calls select the operational mode of the
driver, which can be
.I open-only
or
.I always.

In open-only mode, the watchdog will not expire if the device file is
not opened by any process, while in always
mode the behaviour is independent of the device file being opened.

Reading from the device file will return an unsigned integer denoting
the number of seconds left till the watchdog expires.  Writing an
unsigned integer to the device file will set the expiration period in
seconds.  Note that the hardware watchdog will be triggered
independently with a configurable period.  See the section
CONFIGURATION for details.

An expiration of the watchdog will trigger a hard-reset of the machine.

.SH "CHAIN API"
The second API, which is implemented only through calls to ioctl(2),
can be used to register configurable
.I watchdog chains
from either user or kernel space.  A watchdog chain
is identified by an unsigned integer and can contain up to three
.I action stages.
A
.I time interval
in seconds and an
.I action
is associated with each stage.  When the chain is not reset before the
interval elapses, the associated action is triggered and the chain
moves on to the next stage.

A chain can request to kill the registering process if the interval
elapses.  In this case a restarted process can register with the
driver giving the same identifier and reset the chain.  This is the
main reason why there is no association between chains and processes
or open device files.

For a detailed description of the possible chain configurations, see
the description of the
.B WDT_REGISTER
ioctl call.

Note that when mixing the two interfaces, the second API takes
precedence.  That is, expiry of the interval set by writing to the
device file while a chain is registered, will not trigger any actions.

Also note that the default operational mode of the driver,
i.e. open-only or always can only be configured in the source-code.

.SH IOCTLS
.TP
WDT_OPEN_ONLY
This parameterless call selects the
.I open-only
operational mode of the driver as described above.

.TP
WDT_ALWAYS
Also a parameterless call, this sets the driver to the
.I always
operational mode.

.TP
WDT_REGISTER
This and the two following ioctls constitute the
.I chain interface
described above.  The parameter given to the call is a pointer to a
structure with the following layout:

 typedef struct wdt_param {
   unsigned chainid;
   unsigned long timer_count[3];
   int action[3];
   int signal;
 } wdt_param_t;

Each stage is configured with entries in the arrays
.I timer_count
and
.I action.
The timer_count contains the length of the interval in seconds
while action contains one of the constants
.B WDT_ACTION_SIGNAL, WDT_ACTION_KILL,
.B WDT_ACTION_REBOOT
and
.B WDT_ACTION_RESET.
A timer_count of zero signals the end of the chain.

The ACTION_SIGNAL will send the configurable signal with number
.I signal
to the registering process, while ACTION_KILL signals SIGKILL which
can not be caught by the registered process.
ACTION_REBOOT tries a soft reboot and ACTION_RESET
triggers a hard-reset of the machine.

When stages of the chain are to be left unused, they should be filled
with zero entries.

Note that internally a hard-reset stage is appended as a stop entry
ensuring a chain will never exceed its stages.

.TP
WDT_RESET
This call resets the chain denoted by the unsigned integer passed to
it.  When reset, a chain will expire beginning with stage zero again.

.TP
WDT_UNREGISTER
As closing the device file will not have any effect on chains, a
process must unregister a chain if the service is no longer needed.
This can be done with this ioctl taking an unsigned integer as a
parameter denoting the chain to be unregistered.

.SH "IOCTL RESULT VALUES"
On successful completion, the above calls to ioctl(2) return 0.  When
invalid parameters are provided or an error occurs, a negative value
will be returned and
.B errno
set accordingly.  Specifically
.B "EINVAL, EFAULT, ENOMEM"
can be returned.

.SH "KERNEL INTERFACE"
Modules can also register with the chain API of the watchdog driver.
For this the three functions
.B wdt_register_mon_chain, wdt_reset_mon_chain
and
.B wdt_unregister_mon_chain
are exported from the driver.  The first function takes one argument,
namely a pointer to a
.I wdt_param
structure.  The other two calls take a pointer to an unsigned integer
as a parameter, namely the chain id of the chain to be reset or
unregistered.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The driver is configurable through parameters passed to the driver
through the Linux commandline as
.B "wdt=<opts>".
Multiple options can be seperated by
commas, as usual.

.B timeout:<n>
will set the expiry period of the regular driver API to <n> seconds.

.B period:<n>
sets the period with which the hardware watchdog is triggered to <n>
jiffies.  This usually means 1/100th of a second.  The default for the
MPC5xxx is (1*HZ), resulting in 1 watchdog trigger per second.

.B off
will disable the software APIs of the driver but still trigger the
hardware watchdog as described previously.

.SH EXAMPLE
The following code snippet registers a watchdog chain whose first
stage will expire after 3 seconds and send the SIGUSR1 signal to the
process.  When 5 seconds after this the chain is not reset, the
machine will do a hard-reset.

  wdt_param_t param;

  /* Setup signal handling */
  signal(SIGUSR1, got_signal);

  param.chainid=823;
  param.timer_count[0]=3;
  param.action[0]=WDT_ACTION_KILL;
  param.signal=SIGUSR1;
  param.timer_count[1]=5;
  param.action[1]=WDT_ACTION_RESET;

  /* Register chain */
  ioctl(fd, WDT_REGISTER, &param);
  ..
  /* Reset chain    */
  ioctl(fd, WDT_RESET, &param.chainid);

.SH FILES
 /dev/watchdog
