doc/board/armltd/vexpress64.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Arm Versatile Express
=====================

The vexpress_* board configuration supports the following platforms:

 * FVP_Base_RevC-2xAEMvA
 * FVP_BaseR_AEMv8R
 * Juno development board

Fixed Virtual Platforms
-----------------------

The Fixed Virtual Platforms (FVP) are complete simulations of an Arm system,
including processor, memory and peripherals. They are set out in a "programmer's
view", which gives a comprehensive model on which to build and test software.

The supported FVPs are available free of charge and can be downloaded from the
Arm developer site [1]_ (user registration might be required).

Supported features:

 * GICv3
 * Generic timer
 * PL011 UART

The default configuration assumes that U-Boot is bootstrapped using a suitable
bootloader, such as Trusted Firmware-A [4]_. The u-boot binary can be passed
into the TF-A build: ``make PLAT=<platform> all fip BL33=u-boot.bin``

The FVPs can be debugged using Arm Development Studio [2]_.

Juno
----

Juno is an Arm development board with the following features:

 * Arm Cortex-A72/A57 and Arm Cortex-A53 in a "big.LITTLE" configuration
 * A PCIe Gen2.0 bus with 4 lanes
 * 8GB of DRAM
 * GICv2

More details can be found in the board documentation [3]_.

References
----------

.. [1] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/simulation-models/fixed-virtual-platforms
.. [2] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/embedded/arm-development-studio
.. [3] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/development-boards/juno-development-board
.. [4] https://trustedfirmware-a.readthedocs.io/

Commit message:

board: vexpress64: enable bloblist for SPL handoff
Enable bloblist on vexpress64 platforms to facilitate information
passing from TF-A using the firmware handoff framework.

Signed-off-by: Harrison Mutai <harrison.mutai@arm.com>

doc/board/armltd/vexpress64.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Arm Versatile Express
=====================

The vexpress_* board configuration supports the following platforms:

 * FVP_Base_RevC-2xAEMvA
 * FVP_BaseR_AEMv8R
 * Juno development board

Fixed Virtual Platforms
-----------------------

The Fixed Virtual Platforms (FVP) are complete simulations of an Arm system,
including processor, memory and peripherals. They are set out in a "programmer's
view", which gives a comprehensive model on which to build and test software.

The supported FVPs are available free of charge and can be downloaded from the
Arm developer site [1]_ (user registration might be required).

Supported features:

 * GICv3
 * Generic timer
 * PL011 UART

The default configuration assumes that U-Boot is bootstrapped using a suitable
bootloader, such as Trusted Firmware-A [4]_. The u-boot binary can be passed
into the TF-A build: ``make PLAT=<platform> all fip BL33=u-boot.bin``

The FVPs can be debugged using Arm Development Studio [2]_.

Juno
----

Juno is an Arm development board with the following features:

 * Arm Cortex-A72/A57 and Arm Cortex-A53 in a "big.LITTLE" configuration
 * A PCIe Gen2.0 bus with 4 lanes
 * 8GB of DRAM
 * GICv2

More details can be found in the board documentation [3]_.

Bloblist Support
----------------

The ``vexpress_fvp_bloblist_defconfig`` configures U-Boot to be compiled for
Vexpress64 with Bloblist as the primary method for information handoff between
boot stages. U-Boot offers three methods to set up a bloblist: using a
predefined bloblist at a specified address, dynamically allocating memory for a
bloblist, or utilizing a standard passage-provided bloblist with automatic size
detection.

By default, ``vexpress_fvp_bloblist_defconfig`` uses the standard passage method
(CONFIG_BLOBLIST_PASSAGE) because TF-A provides a Transfer List in non-secure
memory that U-Boot can utilise. This Bloblist, which is referred to as a Transfer List in
TF-A, contains all necessary data for the handoff process, including DT and ACPI
tables.

References
----------

.. [1] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/simulation-models/fixed-virtual-platforms
.. [2] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/embedded/arm-development-studio
.. [3] https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/development-boards/juno-development-board
.. [4] https://trustedfirmware-a.readthedocs.io/
