.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Sean Anderson <seanga2@gmail.com>
.TH DUMPIMAGE 1 2022-06-11 U-Boot
.SH NAME
dumpimage \- extract data from U-Boot images
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY dumpimage
.OP \-T type
.BI \-l\~ image
.YS
.SY dumpimage
.OP \-T type
.OP \-p position
.BI \-o\~ outfile
.I image
.YS
.SY dumpimage
.B \-h
.YS
.SY dumpimage
.B \-V
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dumpimage
lists and extracts data from U-Boot images. If
.B \-l
is specified,
.B dumpimage
lists the components in
.IR image .
Otherwise,
.B dumpimage
extracts the component at
.IR position " to " outfile .
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information and exit.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Print the header information for
.IR image ,
including a list of components.
.
.TP
.BI \-o " outfile"
The file to write the dumped component to.
.TP
.BI \-p " position"
Specify the
.I position
of the component to dump. This should be a numeric index, starting at 0. If not
specified, the default
.I position
is 0.
.
.TP
.BI \-T " type"
Specify the
.I type
of the image. If not specified, the image type will be automatically detected. A
list of supported image types may be printed by running
.BR "mkimage\~\-T\~list" .
.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version information and exit.
.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to the
.UR https://\:source\:.denx\:.de/\:u-boot/\:u-boot/\:issues
U-Boot bug tracker
.UE .
.SH EXAMPLES
Create a multi-file image and then extract part of that image
.PP
.EX
.in +4
$ \c
.B mkimage \-A x86 \-O linux \-T multi \-n x86 \\\\\&
.in +4
.B \-d vmlinuz:initrd.img:System.map multi.img
.in
Image Name:   x86
Created:      Thu Jul 25 10:29:13 2013
Image Type:   Intel x86 Linux Multi-File Image (gzip compressed)
Data Size:    13722956 Bytes = 13401.32 kB = 13.09 MB
Load Address: 00000000
Entry Point:  00000000
Contents:
   Image 0: 4040128 Bytes = 3945.44 kB = 3.85 MB
   Image 1: 7991719 Bytes = 7804.41 kB = 7.62 MB
   Image 2: 1691092 Bytes = 1651.46 kB = 1.61 MB
$ \c
.B dumpimage -p 2 -o System.map multi.img
.EE
.in
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkimage (1)
