.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Jassi Brar <jaswinder.singh@linaro.org>
.TH MKFWUMDATA 1 2023-04-10 U-Boot
.SH NAME
mkfwumdata \- create FWU metadata image
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY mkfwumdata
.OP \-v version
.OP \-a activeidx
.OP \-p previousidx
.OP \-g
.OP \-V vendor-file
.BI \-i\~ imagecount
.BI \-b\~ bankcount
.I UUIDs
.I outputimage
.YS
.SY mkfwumdata
.B \-h
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkfwumdata
creates metadata info to be used with FWU.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information and exit.
.
.TP
.B \-v
Set 
.IR version
as the metadata version to generate. Valid values 1 or 2.
.
.TP
.B \-a
Set 
.IR activeidx
as the currently active Bank. Default is 0.
.
.TP
.B \-p
Set 
.IR previousidx
as the previous active Bank. Default is
.IR activeidx "-1"
or
.IR bankcount "-1,"
whichever is non-negative.
.
.TP
.B \-g
Convert the
.IR UUIDs
as GUIDs before use.
.
.TP
.B \-V
Pass
.IR vendor-file
for appending vendor data to the metadata. Supported only with version 2.
.
.TP
.B \-i
Specify there are
.IR imagecount
images in each bank.
.
.TP
.B \-b
Specify there are a total of
.IR bankcount
banks.
.
.TP
.IR UUIDs
Comma-separated list of UUIDs required to create the metadata :-
location_uuid,image_type_uuid,<images per bank uuid list of all banks>
.
.TP
.IR outputimage
Specify the name of the metadata image file to be created.
.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to the
.UR https://\:source\:.denx\:.de/\:u-boot/\:u-boot/\:issues
U-Boot bug tracker
.UE .
.SH EXAMPLES
Create a metadata image with 2 banks and 1 image/bank, BankAct=0, BankPrev=1:
.PP
.EX
.in +4
$ \c
.B mkfwumdata \-v 2 \-a 0 \-p 1 \-b 2 \-i 1 \\\\\&
.in +6
.B 17e86d77-41f9-4fd7-87ec-a55df9842de5,\\\\\&
.B 10c36d7d-ca52-b843-b7b9-f9d6c501d108,\\\\\&
.B 5a66a702-99fd-4fef-a392-c26e261a2828,a8f868a1-6e5c-4757-878d-ce63375ef2c0 \\\\\&
.B fwu-mdata.img
