doc/board/emulation/qemu-riscv.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
.. Copyright (C) 2018, Bin Meng <bmeng.cn@gmail.com>

QEMU RISC-V
===========

QEMU for RISC-V supports a special 'virt' machine and 'spike' machine designed
for emulation and virtualization purposes. This document describes how to run
U-Boot under it. Both 32-bit and 64-bit targets are supported, running in
either machine or supervisor mode.

The QEMU virt machine models a generic RISC-V virtual machine with support for
the VirtIO standard networking and block storage devices. It has CLINT, PLIC,
16550A UART devices in addition to VirtIO and it also uses device-tree to pass
configuration information to guest software. It implements the latest RISC-V
privileged architecture.

See :doc:`../../develop/devicetree/dt_qemu` for information on how to see
the devicetree actually generated by QEMU.

The QEMU spike machine models a minimalistic RISC-V virtual machine with
only CLINT and HTIF devices. It also uses device-tree to pass configuration
information to guest software and implements the latest RISC-V privileged
architecture.

Building U-Boot
---------------
Set the CROSS_COMPILE environment variable as usual, and run:

- For 32-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv32_defconfig
    make

- For 64-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv64_defconfig
    make

This will compile U-Boot for machine mode. To build supervisor mode binaries,
use the configurations qemu-riscv32_smode_defconfig and
qemu-riscv64_smode_defconfig instead. Note that U-Boot running in supervisor
mode requires a supervisor binary interface (SBI), such as RISC-V OpenSBI.

Running U-Boot
--------------
The minimal QEMU command line to get U-Boot up and running is:

- For 32-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv32 -nographic -machine virt -bios u-boot.bin

- For 64-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine virt -bios u-boot.bin

- For 64-bit RISC-V spike machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine spike -bios u-boot.bin

The commands above create targets with 128MiB memory by default.
A freely configurable amount of RAM can be created via the '-m'
parameter. For example, '-m 2G' creates 2GiB memory for the target,
and the memory node in the embedded DTB created by QEMU reflects
the new setting.

For instructions on how to run U-Boot in supervisor mode on QEMU
with OpenSBI, see the documentation available with OpenSBI:
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/qemu_virt.md
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/spike.md

These have been tested in QEMU 5.0.0.

Running U-Boot SPL
------------------
In the default SPL configuration, U-Boot SPL starts in machine mode. U-Boot
proper and OpenSBI (FW_DYNAMIC firmware) are bundled as FIT image and made
available to U-Boot SPL. Both are then loaded by U-Boot SPL and the location
of U-Boot proper is passed to OpenSBI. After initialization, U-Boot proper is
started in supervisor mode by OpenSBI.

OpenSBI must be compiled before compiling U-Boot. Version 0.4 and higher is
supported by U-Boot. Clone the OpenSBI repository and run the following command.

.. code-block:: console

    git clone https://github.com/riscv/opensbi.git
    cd opensbi
    make PLATFORM=generic

See the OpenSBI documentation for full details:
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/qemu_virt.md
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/spike.md

To make the FW_DYNAMIC binary (build/platform/generic/firmware/fw_dynamic.bin)
available to U-Boot, either copy it into the U-Boot root directory or specify
its location with the OPENSBI environment variable. Afterwards, compile U-Boot
with the following commands.

- For 32-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv32_spl_defconfig
    make

- For 64-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv64_spl_defconfig
    make

The minimal QEMU commands to run U-Boot SPL in both 32-bit and 64-bit
configurations are:

- For 32-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv32 -nographic -machine virt -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

- For 64-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine virt -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

- For 64-bit RISC-V spike machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine spike -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

An attached disk can be emulated in RISC-V virt machine by adding::

    -device ich9-ahci,id=ahci \
    -drive if=none,file=riscv64.img,format=raw,id=mydisk \
    -device ide-hd,drive=mydisk,bus=ahci.0

or alternatively attach an emulated UFS::

    -device ufs,id=ufs0 \
    -drive if=none,file=test.img,format=raw,id=lun0 \
    -device ufs-lu,drive=lun0,bus=ufs0

You will have to run 'scsi scan' to use them.

A video console can be emulated in RISC-V virt machine by removing "-nographic"
and adding::

    -serial stdio -device VGA

In addition, a usb keyboard can be attached to an emulated xHCI controller in
RISC-V virt machine as an option of input devices by adding::

    -device qemu-xhci,id=xhci -device usb-kbd,bus=xhci.0

Running with KVM
----------------

Running with QEMU using KVM requires an S-mode U-Boot binary as created by
qemu-riscv64_smode_defconfig.

Provide the U-Boot S-mode ELF image as *-kernel* parameter and do not add a
*-bios* parameter, e.g.

.. code-block:: bash

    qemu-system-riscv64 -accel kvm -nographic -machine virt -kernel u-boot

Debug UART
----------

The following settings provide a debug UART for the virt machine::

    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART=y
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_NS16550=y
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_BASE=0x10000000
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_CLOCK=3686400

To provide a debug UART in main U-Boot the SBI DBCN extension can be used
instead::

    CONFIG_DEBUG_SBI_CONSOLE=y

Commit message:

doc: describe creating a pflash file for qemu-system-riscv64
U-Boot can be executed in place from a flash device.
Describe how this can be emulated on RISC-V QEMU.

Signed-off-by: Heinrich Schuchardt <heinrich.schuchardt@canonical.com>

doc/board/emulation/qemu-riscv.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
.. Copyright (C) 2018, Bin Meng <bmeng.cn@gmail.com>

QEMU RISC-V
===========

QEMU for RISC-V supports a special 'virt' machine and 'spike' machine designed
for emulation and virtualization purposes. This document describes how to run
U-Boot under it. Both 32-bit and 64-bit targets are supported, running in
either machine or supervisor mode.

The QEMU virt machine models a generic RISC-V virtual machine with support for
the VirtIO standard networking and block storage devices. It has CLINT, PLIC,
16550A UART devices in addition to VirtIO and it also uses device-tree to pass
configuration information to guest software. It implements the latest RISC-V
privileged architecture.

See :doc:`../../develop/devicetree/dt_qemu` for information on how to see
the devicetree actually generated by QEMU.

The QEMU spike machine models a minimalistic RISC-V virtual machine with
only CLINT and HTIF devices. It also uses device-tree to pass configuration
information to guest software and implements the latest RISC-V privileged
architecture.

Building U-Boot
---------------
Set the CROSS_COMPILE environment variable as usual, and run:

- For 32-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv32_defconfig
    make

- For 64-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv64_defconfig
    make

This will compile U-Boot for machine mode. To build supervisor mode binaries,
use the configurations qemu-riscv32_smode_defconfig and
qemu-riscv64_smode_defconfig instead. Note that U-Boot running in supervisor
mode requires a supervisor binary interface (SBI), such as RISC-V OpenSBI.

To create a U-Boot binary that can be utilized with a pflash device in QEMU
apply these addtional settings to qemu-riscv64_smode_defconfig:

::

    CONFIG_TEXT_BASE=0x20000000
    CONFIG_XIP=y
    # CONFIG_AVAILABLE_HARTS is not set
    CONFIG_SYS_MONITOR_BASE=0x80200000

Truncate the resulting u-boot.bin to 32 MiB. Add the following to your
qemu-system-riscv64 command:

.. code-block:: bash

    -drive if=pflash,format=raw,unit=0,file=u-boot.bin

Running U-Boot
--------------
The minimal QEMU command line to get U-Boot up and running is:

- For 32-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv32 -nographic -machine virt -bios u-boot.bin

- For 64-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine virt -bios u-boot.bin

- For 64-bit RISC-V spike machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine spike -bios u-boot.bin

The commands above create targets with 128MiB memory by default.
A freely configurable amount of RAM can be created via the '-m'
parameter. For example, '-m 2G' creates 2GiB memory for the target,
and the memory node in the embedded DTB created by QEMU reflects
the new setting.

For instructions on how to run U-Boot in supervisor mode on QEMU
with OpenSBI, see the documentation available with OpenSBI:
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/qemu_virt.md
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/spike.md

These have been tested in QEMU 5.0.0.

Running U-Boot SPL
------------------
In the default SPL configuration, U-Boot SPL starts in machine mode. U-Boot
proper and OpenSBI (FW_DYNAMIC firmware) are bundled as FIT image and made
available to U-Boot SPL. Both are then loaded by U-Boot SPL and the location
of U-Boot proper is passed to OpenSBI. After initialization, U-Boot proper is
started in supervisor mode by OpenSBI.

OpenSBI must be compiled before compiling U-Boot. Version 0.4 and higher is
supported by U-Boot. Clone the OpenSBI repository and run the following command.

.. code-block:: console

    git clone https://github.com/riscv/opensbi.git
    cd opensbi
    make PLATFORM=generic

See the OpenSBI documentation for full details:
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/qemu_virt.md
https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/blob/master/docs/platform/spike.md

To make the FW_DYNAMIC binary (build/platform/generic/firmware/fw_dynamic.bin)
available to U-Boot, either copy it into the U-Boot root directory or specify
its location with the OPENSBI environment variable. Afterwards, compile U-Boot
with the following commands.

- For 32-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv32_spl_defconfig
    make

- For 64-bit RISC-V::

    make qemu-riscv64_spl_defconfig
    make

The minimal QEMU commands to run U-Boot SPL in both 32-bit and 64-bit
configurations are:

- For 32-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv32 -nographic -machine virt -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

- For 64-bit RISC-V virt machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine virt -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

- For 64-bit RISC-V spike machine::

    qemu-system-riscv64 -nographic -machine spike -bios spl/u-boot-spl.bin \
    -device loader,file=u-boot.itb,addr=0x80200000

An attached disk can be emulated in RISC-V virt machine by adding::

    -device ich9-ahci,id=ahci \
    -drive if=none,file=riscv64.img,format=raw,id=mydisk \
    -device ide-hd,drive=mydisk,bus=ahci.0

or alternatively attach an emulated UFS::

    -device ufs,id=ufs0 \
    -drive if=none,file=test.img,format=raw,id=lun0 \
    -device ufs-lu,drive=lun0,bus=ufs0

You will have to run 'scsi scan' to use them.

A video console can be emulated in RISC-V virt machine by removing "-nographic"
and adding::

    -serial stdio -device VGA

In addition, a usb keyboard can be attached to an emulated xHCI controller in
RISC-V virt machine as an option of input devices by adding::

    -device qemu-xhci,id=xhci -device usb-kbd,bus=xhci.0

Running with KVM
----------------

Running with QEMU using KVM requires an S-mode U-Boot binary as created by
qemu-riscv64_smode_defconfig.

Provide the U-Boot S-mode ELF image as *-kernel* parameter and do not add a
*-bios* parameter, e.g.

.. code-block:: bash

    qemu-system-riscv64 -accel kvm -nographic -machine virt -kernel u-boot

Debug UART
----------

The following settings provide a debug UART for the virt machine::

    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART=y
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_NS16550=y
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_BASE=0x10000000
    CONFIG_DEBUG_UART_CLOCK=3686400

To provide a debug UART in main U-Boot the SBI DBCN extension can be used
instead::

    CONFIG_DEBUG_SBI_CONSOLE=y
